<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter VIII: The “Coming Out”</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				</h2>
				<!--<br/> -->
				<h3 epub:type="title">The “Coming Out”</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>At eighteen, Miss Murray was to emerge from the quiet obscurity of the schoolroom into the full blaze of the fashionable world⁠—as much of it, at least, as could be had out of London; for her papa could not be persuaded to leave his rural pleasures and pursuits, even for a few weeks’ residence in town. She was to make her <i>debut</i> on the third of January, at a magnificent ball, which her mamma proposed to give to all the nobility and choice gentry of O⁠⸺ and its neighbourhood for twenty miles round. Of course, she looked forward to it with the wildest impatience, and the most extravagant anticipations of delight.</p>
			<p>“Miss Grey,” said she, one evening, a month before the all-important day, as I was perusing a long and extremely interesting letter of my sister’s⁠—which I had just glanced at in the morning to see that it contained no very bad news, and kept till now, unable before to find a quiet moment for reading it,⁠—“Miss Grey, do put away that dull, stupid letter, and listen to me! I’m sure my talk must be far more amusing than that.”</p>
			<p>She seated herself on the low stool at my feet; and I, suppressing a sigh of vexation, began to fold up the epistle.</p>
			<p>“You should tell the good people at home not to bore you with such long letters,” said she; “and, above all, do bid them write on proper notepaper, and not on those great vulgar sheets. You should see the charming little ladylike notes mamma writes to her friends.”</p>
			<p>“The good people at home,” replied I, “know very well that the longer their letters are, the better I like them. I should be very sorry to receive a charming little ladylike note from any of them; and I thought you were too much of a lady yourself, Miss Murray, to talk about the ’vulgarity’ of writing on a large sheet of paper.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I only said it to tease you. But now I want to talk about the ball; and to tell you that you positively must put off your holidays till it is over.”</p>
			<p>“Why so?⁠—I shall not be present at the ball.”</p>
			<p>“No, but you will see the rooms decked out before it begins, and hear the music, and, above all, see me in my splendid new dress. I shall be so charming, you’ll be ready to worship me⁠—you really must stay.”</p>
			<p>“I should like to see you very much; but I shall have many opportunities of seeing you equally charming, on the occasion of some of the numberless balls and parties that are to be, and I cannot disappoint my friends by postponing my return so long.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, never mind your friends! Tell them we won’t let you go.”</p>
			<p>“But, to say the truth, it would be a disappointment to myself: I long to see them as much as they to see me⁠—perhaps more.”</p>
			<p>“Well, but it is such a short time.”</p>
			<p>“Nearly a fortnight by my computation; and, besides, I cannot bear the thoughts of a Christmas spent from home: and, moreover, my sister is going to be married.”</p>
			<p>“Is she⁠—when?”</p>
			<p>“Not till next month; but I want to be there to assist her in making preparations, and to make the best of her company while we have her.”</p>
			<p>“Why didn’t you tell me before?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve only got the news in this letter, which you stigmatize as dull and stupid, and won’t let me read.”</p>
			<p>“To whom is she to be married?”</p>
			<p>“To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richardson, the vicar of a neighbouring parish.”</p>
			<p>“Is he rich?”</p>
			<p>“No; only comfortable.”</p>
			<p>“Is he handsome?”</p>
			<p>“No; only decent.”</p>
			<p>“Young?”</p>
			<p>“No; only middling.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mercy! what a wretch! What sort of a house is it?”</p>
			<p>“A quiet little vicarage, with an ivy-clad porch, an old-fashioned garden, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, stop!⁠—you’ll make me sick. How <i>can</i> she bear it?”</p>
			<p>“I expect she’ll not only be able to bear it, but to be very happy. You did not ask me if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richardson were a good, wise, or amiable man; I could have answered Yes, to all these questions⁠—at least so Mary thinks, and I hope she will not find herself mistaken.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—miserable creature! how can she think of spending her life there, cooped up with that nasty old man; and no hope of change?”</p>
			<p>“He is not old: he’s only six or seven and thirty; and she herself is twenty-eight, and as sober as if she were fifty.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! that’s better then⁠—they’re well matched; but do they call him the ‘worthy vicar’?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know; but if they do, I believe he merits the epithet.”</p>
			<p>“Mercy, how shocking! and will she wear a white apron and make pies and puddings?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know about the white apron, but I dare say she will make pies and puddings now and then; but that will be no great hardship, as she has done it before.”</p>
			<p>“And will she go about in a plain shawl, and a large straw bonnet, carrying tracts and bone soup to her husband’s poor parishioners?”</p>
			<p>“I’m not clear about that; but I dare say she will do her best to make them comfortable in body and mind, in accordance with our mother’s example.”</p>
			<!--end chapter-->
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
